docs: add template type-checking guide (#33421)
angular/angular: aio/content/guide/template-typecheck.md

# Template type-checking

## Overview of template type-checking

> Just as TypeScript catches type errors in your code, Angular checks the expressions and bindings within the templates of your application and can report any type errors it finds. Angular currently has two modes of doing this, depending on the value of the `fullTemplateTypeCheck` flag.

Reviewer: Given that this documentation goes with v9, we can say it has 3 modes.

However, the `user.name` expression inside the `*ngFor` is not checked, because it's part of the _embedded view template_ of the `NgFor`. In basic mode, Angular does not check expressions within embedded views.

Additionally, many parts of expressions in the template have the type `any` in basic mode.
This includes:
* Local references to components, directives, or DOM elements. For example, the `ref` variable that gets created by `<input ngModel #ref="ngModel">`
* `$event` in an event binding: `<button (click)="onClick($event)">`
* The return type of pipes. For example, the `users$ | async` expression in `{{(users$ | async).length}}`.
* The type of safe navigation operations, such as `user?.name`.

##### Checking the type of an expression

If you write `<map [city]="user.address.city">`, the compiler will verify the following:

* `user` is a property on the component class.
* `user` is an object with an address property.
* `user.address` is an object with a city property.

The compiler will not verify that the value of `user.address.city` is assignable to the city input of the `<map>` component.

The compiler also has some major limitations in this mode:

> * Importantly, it won't check embedded views, such as `*ngIf`, `*ngFor*, other `<ng-template>` embedded view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Importantly, it won't check embedded views, such as `*ngIf`, `*ngFor`, other `<ng-template>` embedded view.
```

* It won't figure out the types of `#refs`, the results of pipes, the type of `$event` in event bindings, etc.
* In many cases, these things end up as type `any` which can cause subsequent parts of the expression to go unchecked.

### Full mode

If the `fullTemplateTypeCheck` flag is set to `true`, Angular will be more aggressive in its type-checking within templates.
In particular:

* Embedded views (such as those within an `*ngIf` or `*ngFor`) will be checked.
* Pipes will have the correct return type.
* Local references to directives and pipes will have the correct type (except for any generic parameters, which will be `any`).
* Local references to DOM elements will still have type `any`.
* `$event` will still have type `any`.
* Safe navigation expressions will still have type `any`.

### Strict mode

> Angular version 9 maintains the behavior of the `fullTemplateTypeCheck` flag, and introduces a third "strict mode". Strict mode is accessed by setting both `fullTemplateTypeCheck` and the `strictTemplates` flag to `true`. In strict mode, Angular version 9 adds checks that go beyond the version 8 type-checker.

Reviewer: We should clarify here that strict mode is only available if using Ivy.

# Template type-checking

## Overview of template type-checking

> Just as TypeScript catches type errors in your code, Angular checks the expressions and bindings within the templates of your application and can report any type errors it finds. Angular currently has three modes of doing this, depending on the value of the `fullTemplateTypeCheck` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just as TypeScript catches type errors in your code, Angular checks the expressions and bindings within the templates of your application and can report any type errors it finds. Angular currently has three modes of doing this, depending on the value of the `fullTemplateTypeCheck` and `strictTemplates` flags.
```

For example, consider the following template:

```html
<p>There are {{users.length}} users.</p>
<ul>
  <li *ngFor="let user of users">
    {{user.name}}
  <li>
</ul>
```

Angular will check the `users.length` expression, and ensure that `users` is a property of the component, and `length` is a property of the `users` object (just as if you wrote `this.users.length` somewhere in the component class).

However, the `user.name` expression inside the `*ngFor` is not checked, because it's part of the _embedded view template_ of the `NgFor`. In basic mode, Angular does not check expressions within embedded views.

Additionally, many parts of expressions in the template have the type `any` in basic mode.
This includes:
* Local references to components, directives, or DOM elements. For example, the `ref` variable that gets created by `<input ngModel #ref="ngModel">`
* `$event` in an event binding: `<button (click)="onClick($event)">`
* The return type of pipes. For example, the `users$ | async` expression in `{{(users$ | async).length}}`.
* The type of safe navigation operations, such as `user?.name`.

##### Checking the type of an expression

> If you write `<map [city]="user.address.city">`, the compiler will verify the following:

Reviewer: The first part of this section (what the compiler checks with a `[city]="..."` binding) is mostly redundant with the above content about `{{users.length}`.

* `user` is a property on the component class.
* `user` is an object with an address property.
* `user.address` is an object with a city property.

> The compiler will not verify that the value of `user.address.city` is assignable to the city input of the `<map>` component.

Reviewer: This information is missing in the description of basic mode above - it's the only part of `Checking the type of an expression` that's not redundant with the content above it.

> The compiler also has some major limitations in this mode:

Reviewer: All of this is redundant with the nearly identical bulleted list above.

* `$event` will still have type `any`.
* Safe navigation expressions will still have type `any`.

### Strict mode

Angular version 9 maintains the behavior of the `fullTemplateTypeCheck` flag, and introduces a third "strict mode".
Strict mode is accessed by setting both `fullTemplateTypeCheck` and the `strictTemplates` flag to `true`.
In strict mode, Angular version 9 adds checks that go beyond the version 8 type-checker.
Note that strict mode is only available if using Ivy.

In addition to the full mode behavior, Angular version 9:

* Verifies that component/directive bindings are assignable to their `@Input()`s.
* Obeys TypeScript's `strictNullChecks` flag when validating the above.
* Infers the correct type of components/directives, including generics.
* Infers template context types where configured (for example, allowing correct type-checking of `NgFor`).
* Infers the correct type of `$event` in component/directive, DOM, and animation event bindings.
* Infers the correct type of local references to DOM elements, based on the tag name (for example, the type that `document.createElement` would return for that tag).

> ## Checking embeded views

Reviewer: Spelling: "embedded"

Although this section could probably be called `Checking of *ngFor`.

The three modes of type-checking treat embedded views differently. Consider the following example:

<code-example language="ts" header="User interface">

interface User {
  name: string;
  address: {
    city: string;
    state: string;
  }
}

</code-example>

```html
  <div *ngFor="let user of users">
    <h2>{{config.title}}</h2>
    <span>City: {{user.address.city}}</span>
  </div>
```

The `<h2>` and the `<span>` are in the `*ngFor` embedded view.
In basic mode, Angular doesn't check either of them.
However, in full mode, Angular checks that `config` and `user` exists and assumes a type of `any`.

> In strict mode, Angular checks that the `user` in the `<span>` has a type of `User` as well as `address` is an object with a `city` property of type `string`.

Reviewer: More accurately, Angular _knows that_ the type of `user` is `User`.
